Now let's take a look at asymmetric encryption.
Asymmetric is a form of encryption where keys are in pairs.
It is known as public key cryptography,
as one of the keys is usually public and the other secret.
One key encrypts and the other decrypts.
To work successfully, asymmetric relies on
a key management system in the form of a public key infrastructure.
A public key infrastructure, or PKI,
is a set of servers, software,
and protocols that manage the keys of a group of users.
PKI uses digital certificates to verify identity.
Certificate authorities, or CAs,
are organizations that act to validate identities and bind them
to cryptographic key pairs by issuing those digital certificates.
Let's go through some examples of asymmetric encryption.
First up, Rivest-Shamir-Adleman, better known as RSA,
it is used primarily for computer messaging, think HTTPS.
RSAs keys are created by generating
two large prime numbers and perform additional mathematical formulations on them,
creating the public key.
The public key is then sent to anyone that requests it.
They encrypt the data and send it back to the recipient.
At this point, the private key is used in
conjunction with one of the original prime numbers to decrypt the data.
We'll close asymmetric encryption with Diffie-Hellman.
In DH, the keys are not exchange necessarily as much as they are jointly derived.
The initial key is agreed upon publicly in the form of a very large prime number,
think 2,000 bits in length.
Each participant chooses another prime number that serves as their secret or private key.
To encrypt, each participant combines their private key with
the public key and sends to the other who adds their private key and sends back.
To decrypt, the recipient simply removes
their private key and the public key leaving the data.
More information on this and all the techniques can be found in the classroom.
Let's look at some strengths and weaknesses of asymmetric encryption.
Asymmetric encryption allows you to verify
the identity of a sender with digital certificates.
Another strength of asymmetric encryption is that
the private key never needs to be shared, thus adding security.
Let's look at a couple of weaknesses.
Asymmetric encryption is much slower than
symmetric due to the requirement of public key exchange.
With certificate authorities being required for authentication of digital certificates,
it has created the need to trust a third party.
What are the common use cases for both symmetric and asymmetric encryption?
Let's find out. Many banking systems
use symmetric encryption due to its performance advantage.
Data at rest, files that are stored on a hard drive,
often use symmetric encryption because the system or the user hold the key.
For asymmetric, common use cases are
digital certificates to verify identity with a third party.
Finally, asymmetric is perhaps most commonly associated with
TLS in the form of HTTPS or secure web browsing.
Think that little lock in your address bar.
The perfect use case is to use both.
For example, in VPN traffic,
the connection is established using asymmetric encryption
then private keys are exchanged and symmetric encryption is established.
SSH operates in much the same way.